---
layout: post
title: 1 Peter 4
tags: [bible]
---

{{ page.title }}
================

<p class="meta">10 Dec 2018</p>

# Contents
* TOC
{:toc}

# Bible Notes Series

Each week, I discuss a little of my process before going into my thoughts on the
passage. When I study a passage, I like to read 3 to 5 commentaries as well as
the passage itself in multiple translations.

There are so many commentaries. I found it pretty overwhelming and ended up just
using a few select commentaries that I'd become aware of over the years (e.g.,
entries in the Tyndale Old and New Testament Commentaries series). This left me
with a narrow, outdated selection of commentaries.

Michael Heiser says that 'commentaries are one of the tools that don't get
better with the passage of time' and, using the example of Genesis 6:1&ndash;4,
talks about how new research can make old commentaries obsolete:

> This new research comes from a thorough reexamination of the Sumerian and
> Akkadian flood epics. The insights were skillfully culled by cuneiform scholar
> Amar Annus in a 2010 journal article. Annus' article is the most current study
> on the Mesopotamian _apkallu_ available anywhere in any form. It supersedes
> all preceding work on this subject. It deals a death blow to any
> nonsupernatural interpretation of Genesis 6:1&ndash;4.
>
> What this means is that every commentary on Genesis you've come to trust can
> no longer be trusted on this passage because it was written before this new,
> ground-breaking research. (2017: 54&ndash;55)

I'm not a professional scholar, I don't have the time to read and evaluate even
a small selection of the commentaries that come on the market. So what do I do?
I find someone else who _is_ a professional scholar to do it for me. I found an
excellent book by John Evans, called [_A Guide to Biblical Commentaries and
Reference Works_](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B01863JKX0) now in its 10th edition
(I don't receive any commissions or anything from this link, I'm just sharing it
because it's an excellent resource).

In this book, John Evans categories and reviews a wide range of commentaries.
He categorises commentaries like this:

- Works that espouse a critical theological position
- Works that espouse 'mediating' or mildly critical approaches to biblical
  interpretation
- Important scholarly works work consulting, but of debatable value for a
  pastor's library
- Forthcoming volumes
- Works suggested for purchase
- Works that are worthwhile to purchase but not first priorities
- Leading commentaries that are influential for evangelical scholarly discussion

When I come to study a new book, I get copies of each of the works suggested for
purchase and may buy one or two others if they're referenced in my research. For
1 Peter, this ended up being 7 or 8 volumes.

To give you an idea of what Evans says about the suggested commentaries, I'll
quote from his section on 1 Peter:

> Clowney, Edmund. (BST) 1989. A favorite of mine. His exegetical decisions are
> well considered, and his theological interpretation is very valuable. One of
> the best informed entries in the series. He was a communicator too (former
> President of Westminster Seminary and Professor of Homiletics and Practical
> Theology). This work is interesting from start to finish; you can read it
> straight through. Compare with McKnight, who is stronger in NT scholarship.
>
> Davids, Peter. (NICNT) 1990. My first choice among mid-level works. The
> earlier James commentary led us to expect a lot, and those expectations were
> not disappointed. This is an ideal commentary: careful exegesis, superb
> theological reflection, thorough yet pithy. As I was preaching through 1 Peter
> myself in 1990, Davids was the most lucid and helpful in wrestling with the
> cruxes: 3:18&ndash;22 and 4:1, 6.
>
> Doriani, Daniel M. (REC) 2014. Given very high marks by Carson: 'exemplary in
> its careful handling of the text, theological robustness, and fresh writing
> &hellip; loaded with the best kind of application.' Pastors will rejoice to
> read such model preaching. Compare with McKnight, Helm, and Marshall as
> expositional helps.
>
> Jobes, Karen H. (BECNT) 2005. 'Thankfully manageable in size (ca. 350 pages
> &hellip;), this is nonetheless a major critical commentary' (Green) from the
> evangelical camp. Jobes has done much work on the Septuagint (Westminster PhD)
> and has contributed the Esther vol. to NIVAC. The up-to-date bibliography and
> interaction with recent technical commentaries will make this a fine reference
> vol. for students. Her special contributions, besides the solid exegesis, are:
> a proposal that the recipients were converts, possibly from Rome, displaced to
> Asia Minor; assessment of the LXX background; and a research of the quality of
> the Greek. Pastors can benefit much from the fine exegesis. Students will
> consult Jobes alongside the major heavyweight commentaries of Achtemeir,
> Elliott, and Michaels, with more than a nod to Selwyn, Goppelt, Kelly, and
> Feldmeier. See also Jobes's textbook survey, _Letters to the Church_ (2011).
>
> Schreiner Thomas. _1, 2 Peter, Jude_ (NAC). 2003. One of the best vols. in the
> NT series. Though Schreiner gives a very good study of 1 Peter, with plenty of
> biographical help for students, I have valued this vol. even more for 2 Peter
> and Jude because of the long-standing lack of evangelical exegetical
> commentaries on that portion (Davids and Green have now supplied that lack).
> Preachers will appreciate the author's clarity, exegetical good sense, and
> focus upon theological exposition (more or less Reformed). Blomberg rightly
> says, 'If someone could afford only one commentary on these three letters
> together, then this is the obvious one to choose, with no close rivals.'

Evans updates his Guide approximately every 4 years and I have found Evans'
recommendations to be very good, I've learnt lots and have had some wrong
thinking corrected through reading these commentaries.


# 1 Peter 4: Interesting Things

- **v. 1**: 'whoever suffers in the body is done with sin'

- **v. 2**: 'they are surprised that you do not join them'

  Our society must be far less excessive, at least in the parts I see. As a
  young man, there were many situations where I was confronted with wild living
  like Peter describes. And, yes, I have spent enough time in the past doing
  what pagans choose to do. But I've never been invited to an orgy and I no
  longer get invited to parties with excessive drunkenness.

- **v. 6**: 'for this is the reason the gospel was preached even to those who
  are now dead, so that they might be judged according to human standards in
  regard to the body, but live according to God in regard to the spirit'

  Everything in this verse is interesting. The gospel was preached to dead
  people? They get judged but also live?

- **v. 7**: 'be alert and of sober mind so that you may pray'

  Is Peter warning against being too drunk or tired to pray?

- **v. 8**: 'because love covers over a multitude of sins'

  If I love someone else, should I be _overlooking_ their sins? Or, will I be
  less likely to sin because I love them? Or maybe something else is going on
  here?

- **v. 9**: 'offer hospitality to one another without grumbling'

  Apart from lust, this is the sin I most struggle with from everything
  mentioned in 1 Peter 4. I like to show hospitality, but on my terms. If
  someone shows up unexpectedly, I have been known to do a fair amount of
  grumbling. I don't think most others struggle with it, certainly most people I
  know show what looks like a genuine joy in serving others, even when people
  arrive unexpectedly.

- **v. 10**: 'do so as one who speaks the very words of God'

- **v. 15**: 'or even as a meddler'

- **v. 17**: 'for it is time for judgment to begin with God's household'

- **v. 18**; 'if it is hard for the righteous to be saved'


# Selected Passage: 1 Peter 4:15

> If you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or thief or any other kind of
> criminal, or even as a meddler. (NIV)


## Outline (Jobes 2005)

- A Greeting to the Christian Diaspora of Asia Minor (1:1&ndash;12)
- The Opening of the Letter: Reassurance for God's People (1:3&ndash;2:10)
- As God's People, Living Godly Lives (2:11&ndash;4:11)
- Consolation for the Suffering Flock (4:12&ndash;5:11)
  - Two Final Thoughts About Suffering for Christ (4:12&ndash;19)
    - **The Blessing of Suffering (4:12&ndash;16)**
    - Suffering Now as Eschatological Judgment (4:17&ndash;18)
    - Trusting God Even While Suffering (4:19)
  - Final Exhortations to the Community (5:1&ndash;11)
- The Letter Closing: Final Words and Greetings (5:12&ndash;14)


## Meddling

Writing on 1 Peter 4:15, J.R. Michaels says this:

> Peter's terminology suggests that he may have known of Christians who
> considered themselves in similar fashion **guardians of public morality**, and
> (in contrast to Epictetus) wants to warn his readers against assuming such a
> posture.
>
> &hellip; Peter stands in agreement here with most pagan writers, and with the
> Apostle Paul.
>
> &hellip; It is still possible that Peter chose ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος instead of the
> more common περίεργος with the function of the Christian ἐπίσκοπος, or
> 'overseer,' in mind, so as to warn Christians to recognize the limits of their
> community and **not try to legislate morality for others**. Peter's
> conviction, after all, is that **Christ alone is the real ἐπίσκοπος**.
> (Michaels 1998: 267&ndash;268)

Are we truly meant to 'try to legislate morality for others'? Many Christians
today seem to believe that we should, which has never sat well with me. I think
a discussion of this topic is particularly timely for the church in Australia,
and perhaps the rest of the western world, where we find ourselves transitioning
out of the Christendom period to a much more secular and individualistic age. We
seen inordinately concerned with the morality of those outside the church.

1 Peter was written to a 'church facing, at minimum, social pressure and
ostracization' (Himes 2017) and, ass Scot McKnight writes, 'Peter intends his
readers to understand who they are before God so that they can be who they are
in society' (1996: 36, quoted in Himes 2017). It is thus extremely important to
understand what Peter meant when he wrote against meddling &ndash; our
understanding of who God is and who we are is at stake.

When Peter talks about 'meddling', he used the word _allotriepiskopos_. This
word combines _episkopos_ ('one who watches over, guardian') and _allotria_
('what belongs to another, not one's own, strange') which gives us the idea of
_interfering in matters that do not belong to you_[^1] My reading of this
suggests that, in line with Paul's instruction to the Corinthian believers (cf.
1 Corinthians 5:12&ndash;13), Christians should concern themselves with those
inside the church not those outside the church, whom God will judge.

[^1]:
    > What does the word _allotriepiskopos_ mean? It does not occur elsewhere in
    > the New Testament, the LXX, the writings of Josephus or Philo, or any
    > other known Greek literature that predates 1 Peter. In such extreme cases
    > (and only in such cases), etymology may assist us in understanding the
    > meaning.  In this case, _episkopos_ ('one who oversees') plus _allotria_
    > ('things which belong to another') would seem to resul tin the idea of
    > people who oversee matters that do not belong to them&emdash;in other
    > words, 'a busybody in other people's matters' (NKJV) or 'meddler' (NIV,
    > ESV). Paul sues a more common word for this concept, _periergos_, in 1
    > Timothy 5:13.  Peter uses this rarer word to create a stark contrast with
    > his use of _episkopos_ a few verses later, reminding the Christian
    > community that some matters are outside of their jurisdiction. (Himes
    > 2017)

    > Given the lack of lexical evidence from contemporaneous Greek sources,
    > scholars have been forced to move to etymological considerations to define
    > ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος. That the word is clearly a compound may allay fears of
    > committing an etymological fallacy, especially if, as is likely, the
    > author of 1 Peter coins the term for his particular situation. In
    > addition, early precedent for drawing on etymological considerations is
    > evident in the Greek manuscripts. Two variant readings, ἀλλότριος
    > ἐπίσκοπος and ἀλλοτρίοις ἐπίσκοπος, indicate that etymology was at least
    > one way that scribes attempted to define the obscure ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος.
    > The combination of ἀλλότριος (not one's own) and ἐπίσκοπος (one who
    > observes or watches over) would, at first blush, seem to point to a person
    > who concerns himself/herself in the affairs of another. In support of
    > this, Hermann W. Beyer indicates, '[w]henever ἀλλότριος is used [in a
    > compound], it always denotes an activity which is foreign to the doer, or
    > which is not his concern.' The sense of concerning oneself in another's
    > affairs, that is, meddling, is what many have argued that ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος
    > means. In fact, most modern English translations move in this direction,
    > as the examples above indicate. (Brown 2006: 550–551)

    > It is clear that all known forms of the allotrio compounds denote an
    > activity that is not the concern of the doer, and that in 1 Pet. 4:15 this
    > behavior should be avoided. Therefore, 'meddler' remains the best inferred
    > sense from the currently available data (Jobes 2005: 297)

Peter Davids says that Peter is likely 'concerned that Christians in their
rejection of idolatry and pagan morality or their zeal for the gospel not put
their noses into situations in which they ought not to be involved and thus
justly earn the censure of pagan culture for transgressing culturally approved
limits' (1990: 169). In our zeal for the gospel, for standing up for the truth,
for standing up for God, or whatever it is that motivates us, we must avoid
earning the just reproof of the culture for, as Davids puts it, _transgressing
culturally approved limits_. He goes on to say that 'gentle persuasion is one
thing; denouncing idolatry in a temple courtyard is another, as might also be
interfering in the affairs of another family' and, finally, that 'no Christian
should disgrace Christ by being guilty of such things' (ibid.). Our society has
limits. We live in an individualistic society where people's own choices have
high, perhaps supreme, importance. As Christians we seem to act as though it
makes no difference what people think of us, but Peter is saying that it _does_
matter. We shouldn't seek to transgress others' boundaries and thus bring
suffering on ourselves. On the contrary, as Peter goes on to say in verse 16, we
should praise God if we suffer as Christians, which I read to mean, if we suffer
for the way _we ourselves_ live for Christ, not the way we tell others to live.

Jobes summarises this well:

> The prohibition against meddling accords well with Peter's teaching elsewhere
> that Greco-Roman social roles and boundaries are to be respected, though not
> to the point of denying Christ. Peter wants his readers to avoid attracting
> hostility if at all possible, without renouncing their faith in Christ. (2005:
> 289).

I like the way she puts it. We are to 'avoid attracting hostility if at all
possible' but we mustn't go so far as to 'renounce [our] faith in Christ'. The
truth we stand up for, the truth we defend, is that _we are Christ's_, he owns
us, he is our master. We don't need to defend the truth that God's way is the
right way, we can leave that to God. This, of course, matches what we find
elsewhere in the New Testament:

> Yet we urge you, brothers and sisters, to do so more and more, and to make it
> your ambition to lead a quiet life: You should mind your own business and work
> with your hands, just as we told you, so that your daily life may win the
> respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on anybody. (1
> Thessalonians 4:10b&ndash;12, NIV)

> Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities,w to be obedient, to
> be ready to do whatever is good, to slander no one,y to be peaceable and
> considerate, and always to be gentle toward everyone. (Titus 3:1&ndash;2, NIV)

I don't know whether Peter and Paul would say that Christians' sphere of
responsibility is the local church or the wider church, whether, when we mind
our own business, that is the business of the local church or the whole church
on earth[^2]. It seems clear to me, however, that we mustn't usurp God's
authority to deal with non-Christians as he sees fit. In light of McKnight's
summary that 'Peter intends his readers to understand who they are before God so
that they can be who they are in society' (1996: 36), this reading seems
appropriate. For a long time, I have struggled to articulate why I'm so
uncomfortable with the attitudes that some Christians and churches seem to have
to those outside the church. These attitudes range from disinterested
condemnation to militant opposition. I'm coming to see that my discomfort is
because it's not our job to condemn others or to oppose their ways of life. No,
it's God's job and, when we _try to be God_, we commit the most fundamental of
sins.

[^2]:
    On the face of it, it seems likely to me that both Peter and Paul encouraged
    Christians to keep their concerns to their local church and not the wider
    church. Peter used the word _episkopos_ which suggests to me a specific area
    of influence, but I didn't have time to do any in-depth study on this, so I
    could be way off.


## Meddling Hurts Evangelism

I'm not going to give a detailed defence of this position, but I believe that as
Christians, Jesus has given us a single job: to proclaim his kingdom:

> Then Jesus came to them and said, 'All authority in heaven and on earth has
> been given to me. Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing
> them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and
> teaching them to obey everything I have commended you. And surely I am always
> with you, to the very end of the age.' (Matthew 28:18&ndash;20, NIV)

How does Paul accomplish this task? By proclaiming Jesus Christ crucified and
nothing else:

> When I came to you, I did not come with eloquence or human wisdom as I
> proclaimed to you the testimony about God. For I resolved to know nothing
> while I was with you except Jesus Christ and him crucified. (1 Corinthians
> 2:1b&ndash;4, NIV)

In the Greco-Roman world, meddling was a serious offence, as it is in our
society today.

> Interference or meddling, then, is overseeing the activities of others when
> one has no proper right to do so. And interfering in this way is likely to get
> one 'overthrown' by those who are the recipients of the interference. The
> seriousness of the repercussion hints at the seriousness of the transgression.
> (Brown 2006: 554)

> The busybody, then, is a leech on society who is thus abhorred by society:
> 'Busybodies search out these very matters and others still worse, not to cure,
> but merely to expose them. For this reason they are hated deservedly'. Indeed,
> a busybody is so devoted to his 'curiosity' that he will ruin his own affairs
> over his obsession with those of his neighbor. (Himes 2017, quoting from
> Plutarch 1874: &sect;7 [517D&ndash;E])

In verse 14, Peter says that 'if you are insulted because of the name of Christ,
you are blessed, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you' and, of
course, continue sin verse 15, 'if you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or
thief or any other kind of criminal, or even as a meddler.' Peter is saying
that, if you meddle, you are not acting on behalf of Christ. Plutarch says that
'busybodies search out these very matters &hellip; not to cure, but merely to
expose them.' Now, as Christians we know the only cure for sin is heart
transformation through the Spirit. Thus, if we understand this meddling to be
interfering in matters that do not concern us, we certainly fall under
Plutarch's criticism when, for example, we try to force people not to sin
through legislation. This meddling is most unwelcome in our society as it was in
Peter and Plutarch's society and it hurts our witness.

Brown says that meddling in 1 Peter 4:15 'likely refers to movement outside of
culturally appropriate social boundaries' and that 'this type of interference
&hellip; would be understood as having insubordination to the _polis_' (2006:
567)[^3]. He links it to the household code of 1 Peter 2:11&ndash;3:12, which
talks about submitting ourselves to every human authority for the Lord's sake.
In our society, Christians are often accused of meddling, we're told 'to mind
our own business' and it seems to me that Peter is telling us the same thing. We
are not above the other people in our society. It is not right to thwart
democratic processes, even if we say 'God's rules are the best for everyone,
everyone will be happier and more whole if they just follow God's law'. This is
only true if they have been regenerated, born anew, by the Spirit. For those who
have not been born of the Spirit, the message of the cross is foolishness (1
Corinthians 1:18, cf. 1:23).

[^3]:
    > In conclusion, ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος in 1 Peter 4:15 &hellip; likely refers to
    > movement outside of **culturally appropriate social boundaries**. This
    > type of interference in the social order has political ramifications and
    > as such would be understood as involving **insubordination to the
    > _polis_**. The admonition to 4:15 to avoid this insubordinate behavior
    > fits the Petrine concern for ensuring that Christian behavior reproached
    > by pagan neighbors is truly good and not evil (cf. 2:11&ndash;12,
    > 4:15&ndash;16). In fact, the prohibition against behaving as an
    > ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος provides a thematic parallel to the submissive behavior
    > commended earlier in the domestic code (2:11&ndash;3:12). (Brown 2006:
    > 567)

McKnight says that 'When facing suffering, the Christian needs to remind himself
or herself to guard good behaviour with a firm shield. Whatever happens to us,
we are not to ruin the cause of the gospel with filthy works of evil' (1996:
256). What we do and say matters. We have been given a job to do by Jesus our
master. When we tell non-Christians that they must adhere to our moral
standards, when we tell them that we'll punish them if they don't, we're
proclaiming a gospel of works. Not only do we usurp God's authority, not only do
we ignore the task we've been given, when we focus on what others are doing
wrong without calling them to repentance, we actively work against God's truth
and plan. We must ensure that we keep our focus not on what others are doing
wrong, but on the task we have been given, which is to make Jesus known, to make
disciples and is the only thing that will truly cure the sin in our society.


## Are There Exceptions?

Surely there are exceptions to this? Surely we must act when vulnerable people
are being oppressed. Surely we cannot stand idly by while abortion becomes more
and more prevalent. Personally, yes, I believe that abortion is one of those
things that all people, not just Christians, have the right and the obligation
to oppose. I do not believe that this is usurping God's authority. On the other
hand, defending the idea of Christian marriage to a secular society seems to
fall outside our jurisdiction. As do divorce, homosexuality and perhaps even
euthanasia.[^4] Certainly these things all fall in God's jurisdiction, but I
think the takeaway from 1 Peter 4:15 is that God has not given us authority over
them. He has given us a job to do, which is to preach the kingdom, to preach
King Jesus, but that job is not to legislate morality for those outside the
church.

[^4]:
    One could make a good argument that certain euthanasia implementations have
    the potential to take advantage of the elderly and infirm who would like to
    go on living but are manipulated into feeling like a burden to those caring
    for them. My current stance is that there are implementations of euthanasia
    that I would not oppose.

Paul Himes has some helpful things to say about this:

> We certainly do not see the Apostle Peter or the Apostle Paul organizing
> protests or trying to force a Christian worldview on the Roman Empire apart
> from anything other than the transformation that occurs in Jesus Christ alone.
> On the other hand, early Christianity was certainly outspoken in its attitude
> against sin, especially idolatry (Acts 17:16&ndash;31). Thus, the fact that
> the church is not to 'legislate morality' should not be taken to mean that the
> church should not speak out against evil, wherever it may be found, nor cease
> to warn nonbelievers against the consequences of sin. The cry for repentance
> was, after all, a key aspect of the early church's message (e.g., Acts
> 26:19&ndash;20). (2017)

In Acts 17, Paul speaks against idolatry in the synagogue _and_ in the
marketplace. In acts 26, defending himself to King Agrippa, Paul says that he
preached repentance to those in Damascus, Jerusalem, all Judea and to the
Gentiles.

Paul Himes quotes John Elliott, saying that:

> Elliott also mentions 'Censuring the behavior of outsiders on the basis of
> claims to a higher morality, interfering with family relationships,' and
> 'fomenting domestic discontent or discord' as possible elements of being a
> _allotriepiskopos_. As to the first point, if Christians take a
> 'holier-than-thou' attitude and make it their job to seek out the sins of
> their neighbors and confront them about it, then certainly this would fall
> under Peter's condemnation of _allotriepiskopos_. On the other hand, as noted
> above, the call to repentance of sinners always has been a concern of the
> church. Selwyn's key word 'tactless' is worth focusing on; there is a right
> way and a wrong way to confront others about their need for repentance. (2017,
> quoting Elliott 2000: 788, referring to Selwyn 1969: 225).

In verse 14, Peter tells us that 'if you are insulted because of the name of
Christ, you are blessed, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you.' I am
not suggesting that we attempt to get everyone to like us, never offending
people. For, 'as Jesus himself taught, "Woe to you when everyone speaks well of
you" (Luke 6:26, TNIV), for such universal acclaim suggests that one has in some
way compromised the testimony of God's truth in order to please' (Jobes 2005:
287). But, as Peter says, it is only a blessing if we are suffering for doing
good, not for meddling. If we suffer because we proclaim Christ in an
evangelistic effort, then we are blessed. If we suffer because we are blessed.
If we suffer because we are meddling in the affairs of others, then we are not.

I have not done a full study of how Christians should behave in a hostile
culture. My task in these studies is primarily to sit with the verses of
scripture I am studying, not to develop a systematic theology. Naturally, I will
discuss patterns I see emerging in scripture, but I do not claim to have done an
exhaustive study on any topic, certainly not one as wide reaching as this one. I
am not aware of any persuasive arguments against the conclusions I have drawn
here[^5] but I will be neither surprised nor disappointed if I discover one
tomorrow.
uuu

[^5]:
    There are certainly commentators who take what may be a softer approach to
    understanding _meddler. One example is Thomas Schreiner, who seems to
    describe Peter's inclusion of _meddling_ as an example of the Christian
    pattern of taking something (in this case, holiness) further than what would
    be expected:

    > Peter realized that most Christians will not be guilty of obvious sins
    > like murder and stealing, and so he concluded by encouraging believers to
    > even refrain from annoying others. If believers act like busybodies, they
    > would be considered to be pests who deserve ostracism and mistreatment.
    > Hence, though certainty is impossible, a reference to being a busybody
    > seems probable. Peter wanted believers to refrain from acting tactlessly
    > and without social graces. (Schreiner 2003: 224)


# References

Brown, J.K., 2006. Just a Busybody? A Look at the Greco-Roman Topos of Meddling
for Defining ἀλλοτριεπίσκοπος in 1 Peter 4:15. _Journal of Biblical Literature_,
125.

Davids, P.H., 1990. _The First Epistle of Peter_, Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B.
Eerdmans Publishing Co.

Elliott, John H., 2000. _1 Peter: A New Translation with Introduction and
Commentary_. Anchor Yale Bible Commentary. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Green, Joel B, 2007. _1 Peter_. Two Horizons Commentary. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Heiser, M.S., 2017. _The Bible Unfiltered: Approaching Scripture on Its Own
Terms_, Bellingham, WA: Lexham Press.

Himes, P.A., 2017. _1 Peter_ D. Mangum, E. Vince, & A. Salinger, eds.,
Bellingham, WA: Lexham Press.

Jobes, K.H., 2005. _1 Peter_, Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic.

McKnight, Scot. 1996. _1 Peter_. New International Version Application
Commentary. Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

Michaels, J.R., 1998. _1 Peter_, Dallas: Word, Incorporated.

Plutarch, 1874. _Plutarch’s Morals_. Goodwin, ed., Medford, MA: Little, Brown,
and Company.

Schreiner, T.R., 2003. _1, 2 Peter, Jude_, Nashville: Broadman & Holman
Publishers.

Selwyn, Edward Gordon. (1946) 1969. _The First Epistle of St. Peter_. London:
MacMillan.
