---
layout: post
title: 1 Peter 2
tags: [bible,1-peter]
---

{{ page.title }}
================

<p class="meta">26 Nov 2018</p>

# Contents
* TOC
{:toc}

# Bible Notes Series

This is the second post in my Bible Notes Series where I go through the Bible
one chapter a week and write some thoughts on a small section.

Each week, I'll start with a description of some aspect of the series or my
process before I dig into the passage itself. [Last
week](/2018/11/19/1-peter-1.html), I gave a general introduction to the series.
This week, I'll give a brief overview of the process I use to read and study
each chapter.

Monday–Thursday:
: * Read the chapter through each day in the NIV

  * Highlight anything I find interesting, confusing or challenging

Friday:
: * <p>Select the verse I'll study and write about</p>

Friday–Saturday:
: * Read the verse or verses in various translations: NLT, AMP, KJV

  * Read any relevant sections in the _Lexham Bible Guide_ for the book (if
    there is one)

    I have found _Lexham Bible Guide_ series to be incredibly helpful in
    widening my theological horizons. They give an overview of the book, the
    passage, various interpretive issues and an overview of the passage's
    application. I'll talk more about these in a future post.

  * Read some commentaries on the verse and try to get a handle on what they're
    generally saying

    I usually read 3–5 commentaries on the passage I've selected.

  * If possible, come to my own conclusions on the issues

    After reading the commentaries, I try to get a handle on what I think the
    verse is teaching, or at least what it's saying to me in my context. This
    isn't always possible – sometimes things require more time, sometimes things
    are too hard for me to understand. I don't consider it a failure if I end my
    study on a verse with unanswered questions.

Saturday–Sunday:
: * <p>Write the post</p>

Monday:
: * <p>Publish the post</p>

# 1 Peter 2: Interesting Things

What I found interesting, confusing or challenging as I read through 1 Peter 2.

* **v 1** 'rid yourselves'

* **v 2** 'pure spiritual milk … grow up in your salvation'

* **v 5** 'are being built into a spiritual house to be … offering spiritual
  sacrifices acceptable to God'

  We are _growing up in our salvation_ so that we can _offer spiritual
  sacrifices that are acceptable_. Peter doesn't seem to be saying that, simply
  because we are Christians, we are automatically a _holy priesthood_ that is
  able to offer acceptable sacrifices. (Before people run away screaming
  'Heresy!', let me say that I haven't studied this verse in any great detail, I
  don't know what it's saying. This is just how it seemed to me when I read it,
  maybe there's an entirely different reading.)

* **v 8** 'which is also what they were destined for'

  Is Peter saying that people who disbelieve were _destined_ to disbelieve?
  Maybe he's saying that the _result_ of disbelief (stumbling) was preordained?

* **v 9** 'royal priesthood'

  What does it mean to be a _royal priesthood_ as well as a _holy priesthood_?

* **v 10** 'once you were not a people'

* **v 11** 'abstain from sinful desires, which wage war against your soul'

* **v 12** 'they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits
  us'

  Peter isn't saying that the pagans will glorify God now. Sometimes we seem to
  be trying to force people to glorify God now (in the same way that others are
  trying to force us to accept their beliefs).

* **v 13** 'submit yourselves for the Lord's sake'

  How does submission to human authorities benefit Jesus? Am I reading this
  wrong?

* **v 15** 'by doing good you should silence the ignorant talk of foolish
  people'

  I think this is something we need to remind ourselves of in the current
  climate. We don't need to use words or arguments or superior numbers or
  political power to silence people, we simply need to do good.

* **v 17** 'show proper respect to everyone … fear God, honour the emperor'

  What do submission (v. 13) and showing proper respect look like? Are we in
  danger of not submitting and showing proper respect to our leaders? What about
  Christian politicians who talk down their opposition? What about Christian
  people who speak poorly about their politicians?

* **v 18** 'slaves, in reverent fear of God submit … also to those who are
  harsh'

  I think _slaves_ here means something like a modern _employee_. We are to
  submit to our employers even when they are harsh.

* **v 21** 'that you should follow in his steps'

  What did Jesus do when he was wrongly accused? What did he do when the leaders
  opposed him? He stayed silent, he didn't defend himself. He was never
  deceptive, he didn't retaliate. Part of what Jesus did on earth was to set us
  an example.

# Selected Passage: 1 Peter 2:1–3

I was originally going to look at 1 Peter 2:4–8:

> As you come to him, the living Stone—rejected by humans but chosen by God and
> precious to him—you also, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual
> house to be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God
> through Jesus Christ … They stumble because they disobey the message—which is
> also what they were destined for. (1 Peter 2:4–5, 8b, NIV)

And that passage certainly has some interesting parts to it, but as I was
studying that passage, I felt drawn to the passage on 'pure spiritual milk'.

> Therefore, **rid yourselves** of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy,
> and slander of every kind. Like newborn babies, crave **pure spiritual milk**,
> so that by it you may **grow up in your salvation**, now that you have tasted
> that the Lord is good. (1 Peter 2:1–3, NIV)

This passage addresses what it means to be a Christian _after_ initial belief (I
had originally called this 'salvation', but I think that's not quite right in
this context). Peter is talking about _sanctification_ in the context of
Christian community.

## Outline (Jobes 2005)

* A Greeting to the Christian Diaspora of Asia Minor (1:1–2)
* The Opening of the Letter: Reassurance for God's People (1:3–2:10)
  * Doxology as the Basis for the Christian Life (1:3–12)
    * Be Children of the Father (1:13–21)
    * Christian Love Means Moral Transformation (1:22–2:3)
      * The Word of God is Imperishable Seed (1:22–25)
      * **Moral Transformation is Spiritual Nourishment (2:1–3)**
  * Be What You Are (1:13–2:3)
  * The Identity of God's People (2:4–10)
* As God's People, Live Godly Lives (2:11–4:11)
* Consolation for the Suffering Flock (4:12–5:11)
* The Letter Closing: Final Words and Greetings (5:12–14)

## A Paraphrase

The NLT renders these verses in a way that gives a slightly different emphasis:

> So get rid of all evil behavior. Be done with all deceit, hypocrisy, jealousy,
  and unkind speech. Like newborn babies, **you must crave** pure spiritual milk
  so that you will grow into **a full experience of salvation.** **Cry out** for
  this nourishment, now that you have a taste of **the Lord's kindness**. (1
  Peter 2:1–3, NLT)

## Pure Spiritual Milk

Paul and the writer of the Hebrews both use _milk_ to describe the elementary
things of faith:

> Brothers and sisters, I could not address you as people who live by the Spirit
  but as people who are still worldly—mere infants in Christ. I gave you milk,
  not solid food, for you were not yet ready for it. Indeed, you are still not
  ready. You are still worldly. For since there is jealously and quarreling
  among you, are you not worldly? Are you not acting like mere humans? (1
  Corinthians 3:1–3, NIV)

> We have much to say about this, but it is hard to make it clear to you because
  you no longer try to understand. In fact, though by this time you ought to be
  teachers, you need someone to teach you the elementary truths of God's word
  all over again. You need milk, not solid food! Anyone who lives on milk, being
  still an infant, is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness. But
  solid food is for the mature, who by constant use have trained themselves to
  distinguish good from evil. (Hebrews 5:11–14)

It is natural to assume that Peter is using _milk_ in much the same way, as what
we need when we are new believers, as something we move on from once we mature.
However, the commentators I read universally agreed that Peter's use of _milk_
should not be construed to have any negative connotations.  No, the milk Peter
is referring to is the food to be _craved_ by all Christians no matter how long
ago they believed, no matter how mature they are, for it is by this milk that we
'grow into a full experience of salvation'.

> Some scholars conclude that the readers were new Christians since they are
> compared to newborns. Such a judgment is mistaken, for the readers are not
> identified as infants in the faith. They are compared to infants who have a
> longing for milk. They are not defined as new converts. … The metaphor does
> convey that believers are dependent upon God for their lives.
>
> … Milk, then, becomes the very substance of life, comprising that which all
> Christians need to progress in their spiritual lives. The image of milk does
> not suggest, then, that believers in Asia Minor need elementary and basic
> teaching. (Schreiner 2003: 99)[^1]

[^1]:
    > Milk, here, is not elementary doctrine, which one perpetually learns; and
    > never comes to the knowledge of the truth, but a mode of living which has
    > the savour of the new birth, when we surrender ourselves to be brought up
    > by God. (Calvin 2010: 63)

    > Milk in this context does not represent elementary Christian teaching (as
    > it does in a different metaphor in 1 Cor. 3:2 and Heb. 5:12–13, where milk
    > is contrasted with meat or solid food), but rather something to be eagerly
    > desired for nourishment. (Grudem 1988: 100)

    > Peter, however, is not thinking of milk as infant diet to be replaced by
    > meat. In Peter's figure the milk of the abiding word is simply the
    > Christian's necessary food. (Clowney 1988: 78)

    > Although elsewhere in the NT milk is used as a metaphor for teachings
    > suitable for immature Christians (Heb. 5:12) or worldly Christians (1 Cor.
    > 3:1), such a negative connotation is not found here. Rather, Peter sees
    > milk as that which all Christians need in order to nurture their new life
    > in Christ, so that they will 'grow up' into salvation, deliverance from
    > God's judgment when the Lord returns. (Jobes 2005: 132)

So what exactly is this 'pure spiritual milk'? In my study, I came across four
options. I've listed small excerpts from some commentaries I read that support
each view.

1. The word of God (what I've always believed)

   > But what is this pure spiritual milk? Several contextual considerations
   > favour a reference to the written word of God, the Scriptures. (Grudem
   > 1988: 101)

   Jobes says that this view is almost unanimous: 'Modern interpreters almost
   unanimously understand the referent of the "pure spiritual milk" metaphor to
   be the word of God, whether in the form of apostolic preaching or
   inscripturated in the Bible' (2005: 132).

2. The Eucharist (something I had never even considered)

   Several resources for this view were listed in the _Lexham Bible Guide_, but
   I do not have access to them so I cannot quote from them. This was not a
   view present in the commentaries I did have access to and I don't find it
   particularly compelling.

3. Christ himself, the living Word of God – both by direct experiences of
   Christ and by experiencing Christ through the Scriptures (also something
   I hadn't really considered)

   > Thus '[Peter] is not telling them to crave the word of God, as if to listen
   > to more sermons or to read more Scripture, as good and even necessary as
   > those activities may be. He is saying that God in Christ alone both
   > conceives and sustains the life of the new birth. It is the Lord God they
   > are to crave for spiritual nourishment' (Jobes 2002: 12).

   > Growth is always growth in faith. The word of the Lord constantly presents
   > the Lord of the word. Coming to the word is coming to the Lord. This
   > central truth cuts both ways. We cannot detach the word from the Lord and,
   > like the scribes and the Pharisees, profess to cling to the Scriptures
   > while refusing the Lord. On the other hand, neither can we profess
   > obedience to the Lord while rejecting his word. To separate a living Lord
   > from a 'dead' book or a divine Lord from a merely human book is to reject
   > the apostolic gospel. (Clowney 1988: 79–80)

4. A new way of living

   > Milk, here, is not elementary doctrine, which one perpetually learns; and
   > never comes to the knowledge of the truth, but a mode of living which has
   > the savour of the new birth, when we surrender ourselves to be brought up
   > by God. (Calvin 2010: 63)

Schreiner says that it is 'the very substance of life, comprising that which
Christians need to progress in their spiritual lives'. Schreiner goes on to say
that 'the word "pure" functions as a contrast to the deceit (_dolos_) believers
are to put aside (v.  1)', that it 'refers to that which is unadulterated and
uncontaminated', and thus is 'health giving and pure' (2003: 99–100).

I couldn't quite work out whether Schreiner took the first or the third position
from my list above:

> Usually, however, in Greek literature the term refers to that which is
> rational or reasonable. It is not equated with the term 'spiritual,' even
> though it overlaps with it. Peter probably opted for the term to clarify that
> the milk he had in view was the word of God. The 'word' (_logos_), after all,
> was the means by which God begot believers. … Hence, Peter used _logikos_ to
> define milk here, so that the readers will understand that the milk by which
> they grow is nothing other than the word of God. The means by which God
> sanctifies believers is through the mind, through the continued proclamation
> of the word. Spiritual growth is not primarily mystical but rational, and
> rational in the sense that it is informed and sustained by God's word. (2003:
> 100)

I find that I cannot agree with Schreiner's statement (though I find it a
difficult statement to understand and so I admit I may have misunderstood it)
that 'The means by which God sanctifies believers is through the mind, through
the continued proclamation of the word. Spiritual growth is not primarily
mystical but rational, and rational in the sense that it is informed and
sustained by God's word.' (2003: 100) Certainly, I agree that it is sustained by
God's word, but I am of the view that, when we read Scripture with the right
heart and with spiritual eyes, we encounter our Lord and God in a way that is
far deeper than simply _rational_ and that it is in these encounters that
spiritual growth really happens.

> He writes, 'In light of 1:25 there can be no doubt that the medium by which
> the milk is received is the proclaimed message of the gospel, but the milk
> itself is more appropriately interpreted as the sustaining life of God given
> in mercy to his children'. Therefore, while it is not incorrect to direct
> Christians to the word of God in Scripture for spiritual sustenance throughout
> life, it is unlikely that Peter means to limit the milk metaphor exclusively
> to the written word of God. This would be especially true at a time before the
> gospel of Jesus Christ is fully and formally inscripturated in the NT. (Jobes
> 2005: 137, quoting Michaels 1988: 89)

Finally, Jobes flips vv. 2 and 3 around:

> The logic of verses 2, then, is 'since you have tasted that the Lord is good,
> crave…', which makes the implied referent of the milk metaphor their
> experience of the Lord himself. (2005: 139)

Therefore, I lean towards the third view, that is Christ plus Scriptures or
Christ in and of himself and Christ through the Scriptures – the pure spiritual
milk we are to crave is Christ, we crave spiritual experiences of him (through
prayer, meditation on scripture and other spiritual practices as well as simply
living for his glory) and we crave rational experiences of him. We need to be
changed in our hearts, in our souls and in our minds (cf. Matthew 22:37) and
Christ meets us where we are needy.[^5]

[^5]:
    There seems to be some seriousness to the debate between the pure milk being
    the scriptures alone or whether it can be Christ _and_ the scriptures. I'm
    sure the debate makes sense and is important from a scholarly point of view,
    but from a practical point of view, I see no danger in adopting the second
    option.

    Jobes says that 'the widespread consensus among modern interpreters that the
    pure spiritual milk of 2:2 is the word of God may seem too strong to
    question, much less abandon.' (2005: 141) Things that cannot be discussed
    always concern (and interest) me.

    If you are interested in learning more (or unconvinced), take a look at
    Karen Jobes' excellent commentary on 1 Peter in the _Baker Exegetical
    Commentaries_ series for a longer discussion of this issue.

## Moral Transformation _is_ Spiritual Nourishment[^2]

[^2]:
    In the *Baker Exegetical Commentary* volume on *1 Peter*, Karen Jobes
    entitles her section on 1 Peter 'Moral Transformation is Spiritual
    Nourishment' (2005: 130).

Schreiner says:

> Spiritual growth is necessary for eschatological salvation. Understanding that
  'salvation' as an end-time reality fits with 1:5 and 1:9 … Some commentators,
  however, make the mistake of saying that Peter referred to end-time salvation
  rather than spiritual maturity. This is a false dichotomy. Peter's point is
  that spiritual growth is necessary for eschatological salvation. The evidence
  that one has been begotten by the Father through the word is that believers
  continue to long for that word and become increasingly mature. (2003: 101)

Though I disagreed (or at least misunderstood) Schreiner's assertion that
sanctification is 'primarily … rational', I agree with his conclusions that
'spiritual growth is necessary for eschatological salvation' and that 'the
evidence that one has been begotten by the father … is that believers continue
to long for that word and become increasingly mature'. This falls in line with
what I am learning more and more about the Christian life: we cannot simply _be
saved_ (get off the Titanic) and then rest on Jesus' laurels. we cannot simply
say, 'I'm with him' (while pointing to Jesus) and do nothing (though if we're
not with Jesus, anything we do is absolutely worthless). No, being with Jesus
must mean more than simply assenting to any Christian creed, it must also mean
that we become more like Jesus and this is something that we must actively
participate in, we cannot just lay back and 'let God work'.

The list of sins in v. 1 was noted by several commentators[^4] as being a list
of _social_ sins. Himes says that:

[^4]:
    > The sins listed tear at the social fabric of the church, ripping away the
    > threads of love that keep them together. (Schreiner 2003: 98)

> This intense craving for God must be accompanied by genuine, un-hypocritical
> affection for other believers: 'When a church yearns for spiritual
> nourishment, that church will not be involved in bitter disputes with
> hypocritical showings or deceitful communications'.' (2017, quoting McKnight
> 1996: 105)

I felt Peter's words in this section were being pressed into my heart by the
Spirit as I read them: I cannot love God and not love his people; I cannot claim
to be craving the 'pure spiritual milk' and practice malice, deceit, hypocrisy,
envy or slander of any kind.

> We now come to the main idea of the verse. Believers should long for the Lord
> if indeed they have tasted or experienced his kindness. … Longing to grow
> spiritually comes from a taste of the beauty of the Lord, an experience of his
> kindness and goodness. Those who pursue God ardently have tasted his
> sweetness. Christian growth for Peter is not a mere call to duty or an alien
> moralism. The desire to grow springs from an experience with the Lord's
> kindness, an experience that leaves believers desiring more.

If I have no desire to grow in my faith, I have forgotten the Lord's kindness
and goodness. Salvation is not something that comes to those who sit back and
fall into that ever-popular idea that God just shrugs his shoulders when we sin
as long as we've put our faith in Jesus. So yes, I must crave Jesus Christ
himself, the pure spiritual milk, the pioneer and perfecter of my faith (Hebrews
12:2) and because I _crave_ Jesus, because I _cry out_ for him, I must crave his
word.

Another main point from the larger section in 1 Peter (1:22–2:3) is that love
and truth must always go together. Clowney puts it well:

> **Love and truth, so often set at odds in contemporary Christianity, are bound
> together by Peter.** Clearly, Peter requires love for fellow-Christians as the
> great mark of true holiness. He is not satisfied with tolerance or acceptance,
> far less with formalized distance. He will have love, sincere love, without
> pretence or hypocrisy. (In the New Testament, 'unhypocritical' always
> describes love.) **But even sincerity is not enough: our love must be 'deep'
> and intense.** Peter uses a word that means 'stretched' or 'strained'. The
> same term describes the earnestness of Christ's prayer in Gethsemane. (1988:
> 74)

Throughout the history of the church and certainly in modern times, there have
always been groups of Christians who seem to view their task as frantically
holding back the tides of heresy that they think are threatening to overwhelm
the church.  I've bought into it to greater and lesser degrees throughout my
Christian life and Peter is saying here that it must not be this way! The way we
interact with each other matters, not just because the world looks on waiting
for us to slip up (though it does, and we never make it wait too long), but
because this is Jesus' bride, this is what it means to grow up in our salvation,
this is what it means to crave Jesus, to long for him. Our brothers and sisters
are not only image bearers, they're _children of the Most High God_! When we
treat them with anything but absolute and total respect, we reject what Jesus
has done for us.  Much of the theology we aggressively debate doesn't matter
nearly as much as we think it does and I don't think us trying to _defend God_
or _stand up for truth_ in some of the ways that we do impresses or pleases God
in the slightest.

It's okay if someone doesn't know the answer to whatever theological question
you might think is _so_ important. Do they trust in Jesus alone for their
justification? Do they _crave_ him above all else as the pure milk they need to
survive? Do they submit to him through the Spirit?  Do they trust in him alone
for their final salvation? I think if they can answer 'Yes' to these questions
then the rest is just details (potentially important, interesting, challenging,
encouraging details, sure, but nothing worth fighting over).

## Can a Christian Survive Outside the Church?

One final note that I found interesting, though it is somewhat outside of the
scope of my study. Talking of 1 Peter 2:1–10, Himes says this (and I agree):

> In addition, this passage demolishes any attempts Christians make to get by
> without a local community of believers. Such expressions as 'I love Jesus but
> don't belong to any church' become incoherent, as senseless as it would be for
> a part of a building to say 'I'm built on the cornerstone but not attached to
> any other building blocks' or for the foot to say 'because I'm not a hand, I'm
> not part of the body' (1 Cor 12:15). Thus, 'private Christianity' is
> oxymoronic and a contradiction in terms. (2017)

Naturally, there were countless stones left unturned in my very brief foray into
1 Peter. There are many things I would love to investigate and I'm sure there
are even more that I didn't even glimpse. Hopefully this has been useful to you,
it's certainly been useful to me.

# References

Calvin, J. & Owen, J. 2010. _Commentaries on the Catholic Epistles_,
Bellingham, WA: Logos Bible Software.

Clowney, E.P., 1988. _The message of 1 Peter: the way of the cross_, Leicester,
England; Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press.

Grudem, W.A., 1988. _1 Peter: an introduction and commentary_, Downers Grove,
IL: InterVarsity Press.

Jobes, Karen H., 2002. 'Got Milk? Septuagint Psalm 33 and the Interpretation of
1 Peter 2:1–3.' _Westminster Theological Journal_ 64.1: 1–14.

———, 2005. _1 Peter_, Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic.

McKnight, Scot, 1996. _1 Peter_. The NIV Application Commentary. Grand Rapids:
Zondervan.

Michaels, J.R., 1988. _1 Peter_. Word Biblical Commentary. Waco: Word.

Schreiner, T.R., 2003. _1, 2 Peter, Jude_, Nashville: Broadman & Holman
Publishers.
