---
layout: post
title: 1 Peter 3 (Part 1)
tags: [bible]
---

{{ page.title }}
================

<p class="meta">3 Dec 2018</p>

# Contents
* TOC
{:toc}

# An Unexpected Detour

This post will be a deviation from my normal series on Bible notes. It's called
1 Peter 3 (Part 1) and there will be a 1 Peter 3 (Part 2) because I got
completely distracted (in a good way) when I started studying the verses I had
selected in 1 Peter 3. This article won't really be about 1 Peter 3 at all, so
I'll pick up next week and get back to the normal routine.

This Saturday, God took me on a journey, a frightening, unsettling journey. Let
me you about it.

I started reading some commentaries on the verses I wanted to look at and didn't
get past the second paragraph:

> **The reason believers are called to bless others is so that they themselves
> will inherit the eschatological blessing of eternal life on the last day.**
> The Old Testament citation commencing in v. 10 confirms that blessing others
> is necessary to receive eternal life, being linked to v. 9 by 'for.' The life
> and days  of v. 10 are nothing other than eternal life and the future
> inheritance. **Those who wish to enjoy such must refrain from speaking evil,
> make a clean break with evil in their lives, and live in the realm of
> goodness.** They must be people who seek out peace and live peaceably. Verse
> 12 confirms the interpretation proposed. **The Lord's favor rests on those who
> are righteous, but he turns his face forever against those who practice
> evil.** (Schreiner 2003, 162)

I really struggle with the fact that the Bible seems to teach two contradictory
things at the same time:

1. that what we do (works) matters for our eternal destiny
2. that we are justified by faith alone, before we have had the chance to do any
   good works

This quote is perhaps a good summary of how I've been feeling:

> I do not want to go to bed at night worrying about whether I will be damned by
> God, but neither do I want a God who is so soft that I do not have to fear him
> or stand in awe of his judgment if I live in sin. (McKnight 1996, 231)

These thoughts have been bubbling beneath the surface for some time. I've always
been uneasy with the way we've described the assurance of salvation, that, if
we've prayed the sinners' prayer, then there's nothing left for us to do except
perhaps evangelism[^1], we're essentially just waiting for death. We talk about
it as though it's a one-time switch &ndash; once we've accepted Jesus into our
hearts (or whatever language you want to use), we can live the rest of our lives
totally opposed to God, we can pursue evil and reject good and God will simply
wag his finger at us, saying something along the lines of, 'You're lucky I love
you, or you'd be in big trouble' and then just wave us through.

[^1]: Though I fail to see what motivates certain Christians who have adopted
      irresistible grace, predestination and a total rejection of any value in
      our works to evangelise.

The classical Protestant response to this is 'we are saved by faith alone, but
the faith that saves is never alone' (some attribute a quote like this to Martin
Luther). I'm not sure why, but we seem to say something like this and then leave
it, as though there's nothing more to say on the matter. For a long time, I
thought this was at odds with scripture, a watering down of the awesome,
terrifying holiness of God and the shockingly deep sinfulness of man.

# Passages about Our Deeds

There are far more passages than this that suggest our deeds matter. Here are
four that I've been thinking about.

## The Parable of the Sheep and the Goats

The parable of the sheep and the goats in Matthew 25 tells us that the king will
judge us based on our deeds

> 'Then he will say to those on his left, "Depart from me, you who are cursed,
> into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry
> and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to
> drink, I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you
> did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me."
> They also will answer, "Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a
> stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?" **He
> will reply, "Truly I tell you, whatever you did not do for one of the least of
> these, you did not do for me,." Then they will go away to eternal punishment,
> but the righteous to eternal life.**' (Matthew 25:41&ndash;46, NIV)

## True and False Disciples

Talking about true and false disciples in Matthew 7, Jesus said:

> **'Not everyone who says to me, "Lord, Lord," will enter the kingdom of heaven,
> but only the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.** Many will
> say to me on that day, "Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name and in
> your name drive out demons and in your name perform many miracles?" Then I
> will tell them plainly, "I never knew you. Away from me, you evildoers!"'
> (Matthew 7:21&ndash;23, NIV)

Jesus literally says that it's not enough to call on his name &ndash; you _must_
do the Father's will in _addition_ to calling him Lord.

## Wrongdoers Will Not Inherit the Kingdom

In 1 Corinthians 6, Paul gives a list of _behaviours_ not _beliefs_ that will
disqualify Christians from inheriting the kingdom:

> **Or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God?** Do
> not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor
> men who have sex with men nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor
> slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of God. (1 Corinthians
> 6:9&ndash;10, NIV)

Now, Paul goes on to say, 'And that is what some of you were. But you were
washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ and by the Spirit of our God,' (v. 11) which seems to fall into the
now-but-not-yet bucket of the Christian life.

## Be Holy

Of course, we also have what we've been looking at in 1 Peter.

> Since you call on a Father who judges each person's work impartially, live out
> your time as foreigners here in reverent fear. (1 Peter 1:17, NIV)

> Therefore, rid yourselves of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and
> slander of every kind. (1 Peter 2:1, NIV)

> They stumble because they disobey the message&mdash;which is also what they
> were destined for. (1 Peter 2:8b, NIV)

Finally, in 1 Peter 3, Peter quotes from Psalm 34:

> **They must turn from evil and do good; &hellip; the face of the Lord is
> against those who do evil.** (1 Peter 3:11a, 12b, NIV)

## Sin and Forgiveness

In 1 John:

> But if anybody does sin, we have an advocate with the Father&mdash;Jesus
> Christ, the Righteous One. (1 John 2:1b, NIV)

If all our sin was already forgiven, why would we need an advocate? If we simply
needed to flip the salvation switch and we'd sail right into heaven without
another thought, then why would Jesus need to advocate on our behalf with the
Father?

## A Call to Persevere in Faith

> If we deliberately keep on sinning after we have received the knowledge of the
> truth, no sacrifice for sins is left, but only a fearful expectation of
> judgment and of raging fire that will consume the enemies of God. &hellip; How
> much more severely do you think someone deserves to be punished who has
> trampled the Son of God underfoot, who has treated as an unholy thing the
> blood of the covenant that sanctified them, and who has insulted the Spirit of
> grace? For we know him who said, 'It is mine to avenge; I will repay,' and
> again, 'The Lord will judge his people.' It is a dreadful thing to fall into
> the hands of the living God.' (Hebrews 10:26&ndash;27, 29&ndash;31, NIV)

I woke up on Saturday morning quite confident in my conclusion that our _final
judgement_ would be based on the combination of our faith in Christ and our
deeds (a position many would consider at least dangerously wrong, perhaps even
heretical). I still had many questions that I needed to wrestle through, of
course.

The verses I quoted above are some that had been running around in my head for a
while that I thought meant that one could lose one's salvation by persisting in
doing evil. But there's another side to what the Bible says that must be
carefully considered. I'll give two examples.


# Passages about Assurance

I'm sure there are more passages than this that address the question of
assurance, but here are four I came across in my studies that made me rethink my
perspective.

## Jesus' Sheep

> I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one will snatch them
> out of my hand. (John 10:28, NIV)

I have looked at this verse before, and I'd always thought people must've simply
ignored the preceding verse:

> My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me. (John 10:27,
> NIV)

Who are Jesus' sheep? The ones who _listen to him_, the ones who _follow him_,
not only the ones who _believe in him_ (cf. John 10:26). I drew the following
conclusions: (1) salvation is a free gift from God, we are only able to receive
it because the Father qualifies us through Jesus and (2) if we do not live for
God, if we don't listen to Jesus' voice and follow him, we will not receive the
reward of eternal life.

And yet, could it not be equally true that those who are truly Jesus' sheep will
(at least at times) be able to hear his voice and listen to it, that those who
are truly Jesus' sheep will follow him (at least at times)? One reason I think
it might be right to read these verses as not talking about sheep who _always
hear his voice and always follow him_ is that Jesus talks of a lost sheep in
Matthew 18 and Luke 15. It's worthy of investigation, at least. Another possible
reading comes through acknowledging the nature of the ever-present
now-but-not-yet reality of the Christian life on this earth &ndash; perhaps
Jesus was saying that, when you live into the reality of being my sheep, you
will listen to me, you will follow me. Certainly, I have to acknowledge that I
do not always hear his voice, that I do not always follow him.

## God Will Carry the Good Work to Completion

> I thank my God every time I remember you. In all my prayers for all of you, I
> always pray with joy because of your partnership in the gospel from the first
> day until now, **being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you
> will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus**. (Philippians
> 1:3&ndash;6, NIV)

The _you_ in this verse is plural, so perhaps, as some argue, Paul is saying
that God would bring his work in the church in Philippi as a group to
completion. In this case, the verse would read something like this: that God
will bring his good work in Philippi to completion, thus rendering the verse
useless for any discussion on a believer's assurance of future justification.
However, this reading ignores Paul's salutation in verse 1: 'To all God's holy
people, together with the overseers and deacons' and Paul's assertion that he is
confident in his prayers 'for **all** of you'. Thus, it seems that Paul throws
the conclusions I thought I'd reached into total disarray. Paul certainly seems
to be saying that the final destiny of those who have truly been indwelt by the
Spirit ('God's holy people in Christ Jesus') is guaranteed. But what do we do
with Hebrews 10, then?

# An Eye-opening Experience

The view that I'll put forward here conforms pretty well to the classical
Reformed viewpoint. The view that I had when I started studying 1 Peter did not
conform. There is logic to my thought process, but my change of mind (and heart)
did not come through logic. It came, I think, in answer to my prayer that God
would open my eyes and heart to see his truth. I think God is beginning to open
my eyes to some of the depth of what he's done for us. I'm not saying this to
try to push anyone to agree with me or anything like that, but just to express
the awe and wonder I have for a God who answers prayer, who condescends to
instruct even the most thick-headed a believer such as me.

When the Holy Spirit comes to dwell in us we are given a new heart and a new
spirit, as it says in Ezekiel:

> For I will take you out of the nations; I will gather you from all the
> countries and bring you back into your own land. I will sprinkle clean water
> on you, and you will be clean; I will cleanse you from all your impurities and
> from all your idols. I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit in you;
> I will remove from you your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh. And
> I will put my Spirit in you and **move you to follow my decrees and be careful
> to keep my laws.** (Ezekiel 36:24&ndash;27)

If we have the Spirit, _we will be transformed_. If you're not transformed, you
don't have the Spirit. If you're not being transformed, _you are still against
God and God will be against you_.

In _Redemption Accomplished and Applied_, John Murray articulates this well:

> The person who is against God cannot be right with God. For if we are against
> God then God is against us. It could not be otherwise. God cannot be
> indifferent to or complacent towards that which is the contradiction of
> himself. His very perfection requires the recoil of righteous indignation. And
> that is God's wrath. 'The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
> ungodliness and unrighteousness of men' (Romans 1:18). This is our situation
> and it is our relation to God; how can we be right with him? (1955, 117)

Murray goes on to say that 'justification does not mean to make righteous, or
good, or holy, or upright' and that 'in the application of redemption God makes
people holy and upright. &hellip; He begins to do this in regeneration and he
carries it on in the work of sanctification. He will perfect it in
glorification.' (ibid., 118) There's a good chance this was obvious to everyone
except me, but I've never really thought of justification in that way and it
makes perfect sense.

> Faith alone justifies but a person with faith alone would be a monstrosity
> which never exists in the kingdom of grace. Faith works itself out through
> love (Galatians 5:6). And faith without works is dead (James 2:17&ndash;20).
> It is living faith that justifies and living faith unites to Christ both in
> the virtue of his death and in this power of his resurrection. No one has
> entrusted himself to Christ for deliverance from the guilt of sin who has not
> also entrusted himself to him for deliverance from the power of sin. 'What
> shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God
> forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?' (Romans
> 6:1&ndash;2) (ibid., 131)

For a long time, I thought this was at odds with a lot of what I read in
scripture. And what Murray wrote really helped me make sense of all this.
(Murray's words are, I admit, quite similar to much of what others say on the
matter, Murray just expressed it in a way that I finally understood.)

## Making Sense of It All

I think the verses in Matthew 7, Matthew 25 and 1 Corinthians 6 can be
understood in the relatively straightforward manner of answer the question of
how you can know if you're Jesus' disciple. If we aren't pursuing good things,
if we aren't pursuing the Father's heart because we are moved by the Spirit as
it says in Ezekiel 36 in addition to saying 'Jesus, you're my Lord', then we're
not really saying 'Jesus, you're my Lord.' Jesus doesn't want lip service. If
we're pursuing wrongdoing, then the same applies: Jesus isn't really our Lord,
we're faking it.

Hebrews 10 doesn't seem to have as simple an explanation. In his devotional
commentary, _Hebrews for Everyone_, N.T. Wright gives a helpful viewpoint:

> This passage, then, is a warning about a more specific danger: **that someone
> who has come close to Christian faith, and perhaps shared in the life of
> Christian worship, will then turn round and publicly deny it all.** &hellip;
> But the passage remains as a warning to us as well. If we have got as far at
> least as reading Hebrews, and trying to see what it might mean for us, we
> should be all the more eager that there will never come a time when we might
> give in to the temptation to declare that the whole thing was worthless. **The
> living God, to whom everyone will render account (4:13), is neither to be
> trifled with nor presumed upon.** It was after all a nineteenth-century cynic,
> not a Christian believer, who said, 'God will pardon me; that's his job.'
> (2004, 122)

This view lines up with two of Jesus' parables in Matthew 13: the parable of the
sower (vv. 1&ndash;23) and the parable of the weeds (vv. 24&ndash;30). It is
possible for someone to hear the truth but not be transformed by it. It may seem
as though they have been transformed for a time, but the apparent transformation
fades and is shown to be no transformation at all.

## A Working Theory

I don't think I'll become totally convinced of any position on this issue in
just a week of study, especially given that I've now got ideas running around in
my head that I haven't thought about for quite some time, but here's my working
theory.

I owe everything to the Father for his grace to me in sending his Son to die in
my place. I call on the Father and the Spirit daily for help to live for them,
to overcome my fleshly desires. However, I am not yet perfect and I often fail
to be who I am in Christ. My sins involve failing to do good as well as failing
to avoid evil. I want to love what God loves and hate what God hates.

I believe the Bible when it teaches about the importance of what I do and think
and what it teaches about the holiness of God. I also believe that, if I don't
pursue God with my whole heart and work to put the flesh to death, I am missing
out on God's blessings for me here and in some way endangering my future reward.

I am also starting to see a new dimension to what God has done. His declaration
that I am just (his justification of me) will not be revoked. God has made known
his future judgement to me now: I am accepted, justified, made a member of his
family and this judgement will be repeated when God sits in judgement over me.
How do I know that I've received the promise? I have the Spirit living in me.
How do I know I have the Spirit living in me? I am seeing victory in the battle,
I want to listen to Jesus' voice (and at times I do listen), I want to follow
him (and at times I do follow), I want to obey him (and at times I do obey).
Though I am far from perfect, I am able to walk according to the Spirit instead
of the flesh.

## What I Know for Sure

When I fail to live up to who I am in Christ, I must be contrite. I cannot
_presume_ on God's forgiveness. Instead, I thank him for his mercy and trust
that he will forgive me as it says in 1 John: 'If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just and will forgive us our sins and purify us from all
unrighteousness' (1:9, NIV) and 'But if anybody does sin, we have an advocate
with the Father&mdash;Jesus Christ, the Righteous One.' (2:1b, NIV)

I don't know how other people read the verses in Hebrews. I am not even sure
about how I read them, but I know one thing: I don't want to go anywhere near
trampling the Son of God underfoot, treating the blood that sanctified me as an
unholy thing, insulting the Spirit of grace. I want to take seriously the
warning that 'it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.'

# Why is This Important?

As long as the church has existed we have found ways to twist the gospel. At the
moment, it feels like we're still fighting the wars of the 16th century
Reformation, we're fighting so hard against any hint of the error (and it is an
error) that we can trust in our own works for our salvation that we've missed
what God has said to us through his word about the _necessity of good works_. In
an effort to reverse the excesses of the past, we reject out of hand any notion
that _without good works we cannot be saved_.

I recognise that for many people this idea of 'Jesus + good works' is the very
thing they're fighting against, the very heresy that has caused so much damage,
and I do not dispute this, but neither can I dismiss the conclusion that you
must do good works if you are really saved. As James says, faith without works
is dead. If you have no works, you can have no faith. In Jesus' own words, if we
don't do the Father's will, it's not enough to call Jesus Lord. You don't have
to prove to other people that you have faith, it doesn't matter if I see your
good works or not, but don't for a second think that God is going to take some
weak assertion that 'Jesus is Lord' as the kind of faith that saves.

## _Sola Fide_

Oh man, I really regret even _thinking_ about this stuff now. _Sola fide_ is the
doctrine that we are justified by faith alone. We're dealing with two huge
theological topics: _justification_ and _faith_. I don't even know where to
begin to properly define these things, but I can talk about how I understand
them. In the _Lexham Survey of Theology_, Tony Lane writes that 'justification
is a Christian's judicial acceptance by God as not guilty because his sins are
not counted against him.' (2018) By this definition, of course, justification
must be by faith alone (as Paul puts it, 'all are justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus &hellip; For we maintain that a
person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law', Romans 3:24, 28,
NIV).

Lane continues:

> The Reformers coined the doctrine of 'justification by faith alone.' This does
> not mean that faith exists on its own. Saving faith is expressed in baptism,
> is joined with repentance and works through love. Christians are not justified
> by such things, but nor are they justified without them. It is only faith that
> saves, not because faith is greater than love or any other virtue, but because
> faith is never alone, it never exists without love and good works. (2018)

I cannot read Jesus' works in Matthew 7 that Jesus himself will reject the
evildoers[^2] as compatible with the idea that our works exist simply to
demonstrate our righteousness and the reality of our faith to others. I think
they must be to prove our faith to ourselves (by doing good works through the
Spirit we know that we have faith in God) and will be used as evidence _for_ us
in the final judgement (or, if we have not had true faith that led to good
works, as evidence _against_ us).

[^2]: Or, in the king's words in Matthew 25, that those who did not _do good
      works_ will be rejected, cursed and sent into the eternal fire.

If, by _sola fide_, people mean 'we are _justified_ through faith alone' then I
agree, but it seems that we sometimes add that we are also _sanctified_ by faith
alone as though we could wait passively while God made us 'better'. I
acknowledge that I was lost in sin and that nothing I could have done would have
been enough to bring about my justification. I know that I was a sinner in
desperate need of a saviour and that that saviour could only be Jesus Christ. I
know that the Father graciously accepts me because of his Son Jesus.

For some, _sola fide_ has come to mean that 'we are justified by faith alone
which need not be accompanied by good works'. This isn't the view of many
theologians and I've never heard it from the pulpit, but I have a suspicion that
it is the _practical belief_ of many Christians because when we discuss it, for
whatever reason, we leave it at 'justified by faith alone' or 'saved by faith
alone, but faith that saves is never alone' without unpacking what that actually
means.

## Justified _with_ Works

As Lane writes, 'Christians are not justified by [baptism, repentance and
works], but nor are they justified without them.' (2018) Faith cannot exist
without good works. That is clear from scripture. There is, I think, a nuance to
this &ndash; this side of eternity, my faith will always be incomplete because
my understanding and experience of Jesus is incomplete. Paul's words to the
Corinthians come to mind:

> For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to
> face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known.
> (1 Corinthians 13:12, NIV)

Schreiner says this:

> Paul does teach that good works are necessary for justification and for
> salvation, and Wright rightly says that those texts are not just about
> rewards. Those who are righteous are also transformed by the Holy Spirit. Only
> those who are led by the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, march in step with the
> Spirit, and sow to the Spirit will experience eternal life (Galatians 5:16,
> 25, 26; 6:8&ndash;9). Those who practice the works of the flesh and sow to the
> flesh will face eschatological judgment (5:21; 6:8).
>
> Wright is careful to say that he is not talking about perfection but of God's
> transforming grace in the lives of believers. He rightly sees that we have too
> often bracketed out the necessity of good works in evangelicalism. (Schreiner
> 2015, 242)[^3]

[^3]: In his book, _Faith Alone_, Schreiner goes on to talk about where he
      disagrees with N.T. Wright, but I don't think that's relevant to this
      discussion. It makes for great reading though, so I do recommend it.

In _Paul and the Faithfulness of God_, N.T. Wright lays out a view that seems to
make sense but is complicated and I will need more time to fully digest:

> Paul makes a clear distinction between the future 'justification', the verdict
> which will be issued on the last day on the basis of the totality of the life
> led (which in the case of the Messiah's people will be a life generated and
> sustained by the spirit [sic.]), and the present justification which is the
> verdict announced on the basis of nothing but Messiah-faith. (2013, 1028)

Here's where it all clicked into place for me: God knows that having faith in
Jesus _will_ result in a life full of good deeds, it _will_ result in heart
transformation, it will result in a life that, because of Jesus, God will
ultimately judge as _justified_. A believer's present justification is the
pre-declaration of the future verdict based on the only thing God knows we need:
true faith in the Messiah. If we have that, God will work to sanctify us, that's
his promise.

Wright continues:

> Once we locate both of these events, as Paul does again and again, within the
> larger picture of the work of the gospel and spirit, and once we see as
> clearly as Paul did that all that is said of the Messiah's people is said
> precisely because they are 'the Messiah's people', and can be spoken of as
> being 'in him', it ought to be clear that there is a three-fold sequence, each
> part of which is importantly related to the others though playing
> significantly different roles (ibid.)

He gives three points in summary:[^4]

1. 'There is the powerful work of the spirit through the gospel, which "calls"
   people to faith. It is on this basis alone that people are declared to be "in
   the right" &hellip; full members of the family, the people of Abraham, the
   people of the Messiah. _This is justification by grace through faith in the
   present._' (ibid., 1029)

2. 'There is the unbreakable promise that, by the same spirit, all the people
   thus described will in the end be raised from the dead to share the
   "inheritance" of the Messiah, the worldwide inheritance promised to Abraham.
   "The one who began a good work in you will thoroughly complete it by the day
   of the Messiah Jesus."' (ibid.)

3. 'Between (1) the beginning of the work of the spirit and (2) its triumphant
   conclusion, Paul envisages a spirit-led life which does not in any way
   contribute to initial justification, _or to the consequent assurance of final
   justification which that initial justification brings_, but transforms the
   life of the person who has already come to faith. This transformation enables
   such a person to "live by the spirit and not fulfil the desires of the flesh"
   (Galatians 5:16); or, in the language of Romans 8, to have the "mind of the
   spirit" &hellip; rather than the "mind of the flesh."' (ibid.)

[^4]: Wright's summary is itself rather long. If you're interested, please read
      it in the original.

# Summary

I have no idea if anyone will read this far. It will probably seem like an
unnecessarily long-winded description of how some nobody from Adelaide came to
_exactly the same conclusions_ that so many others had reached centuries earlier
and that so many today see no reason to question. It's true, that's what it is.
For my own sake, I'll finish by summarising what I learnt.

I was a sinner in need of redemption. I had turned away from God, made myself
his enemy. I have seen Jesus and put my faith in him, in his work on the cross.
Through his grace and because of my faith in Jesus, the Father has declared me
justified. I've been born again into his family, I've been given a new heart and
his Spirit now dwells in me.  Because I have seen Jesus and put my faith in him,
I cannot help but pursue goodness and reject evil. This does not mean I will
behave perfectly, but that I will not persist in sin, that I will seek victory
over the flesh. Nor does it mean that I have to do it alone &ndash; God's spirit
dwells in me and moves me to actually want what is good. At the final judgement,
God will not send me into the eternal fire, he will not find me to be someone
who called him Lord but didn't do the Father's will. No, because I have seen
Jesus and put my faith in him, my faith works itself out through love, it is not
a dead faith, but a faith accompanied by many good works. This, too, is God's
grace to me. God promises to carry his work in me to completion. I remain aware
of and motivated by the awesome reality of God's holiness and I take the
warnings I've received seriously &ndash; I don't want to get anywhere near
trampling the Son of God underfoot or insulting the Spirit of grace. I believe
these warnings were given to eradicate any idea that one can have faith and
still love evil. I continue to grow in love for God and his people, which is a
blessing, but I know that, on the last day, I will not be talking about what I
have done, but about what God has done in me. My hope lies not in my own power
but in God's grace. Christians who have no desire to work out their faith in
love have a dead faith. To paraphrase Murray, they are monstrosities that cannot
exist in the kingdom of grace.

Finally, I now see that this is no watering down of God's holinenss or our
sinfulness. Quite the contrary, this shows that those whom God calls must
inevitably move toward holiness and away from sinfulness. This actually raises
the bar even higher than what I had previously thought.


# References

Lane, T., 2018. Justification. In M. Ward et al., eds. _Lexham Survey of
Theology_. Bellingham, WA: Lexham Press.

McKnight, Scot, 1996. _1 Peter_. NIVAC. Grand Rapids: Zondervan.

Murray, J., 1955. _Redemption: Accomplished and Applied_, Grand Rapids, MI;
Cambridge, UK: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.

Schreiner, T.R., 2003. _1, 2 Peter, Jude_, Nashville: Broadman & Holman
Publishers. 

Schreiner, T., 2015. _Faith Alone—The Doctrine of Justification: What the
Reformers Taught … and Why It Still Matters_ M. Barrett, ed., Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan.

Wright, N.T., 2004. _Hebrews for Everyone_, London: Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge.
